CONTENTS

1. Introduction
2. Disclaimer
3. Compatibility
4. Acknowledgements
5. Licensing


--- INTRODUCTION

Ponscripter is an NScripter-style novel-game interpreter with an
emphasis on supporting games in Western languages.  The goal is to
provide an easy porting target for translation projects.

If you want an multiplatform interpreter that strives to remain
compatible with NScripter, try ONScripter-En (of which this is a fork)
or the original ONScripter.

If you want a novel-game system designed from the ground up for
original Western-language games, try Ren'Py.

Ponscripter documentation is provided in the form of a set of manual
pages.  Start with ponscripter(7).  If you're on a proprietary system
such as Microsoft Windows that does not support standard documentation
formats, you should be able to access an HTML version of the
documentation online.


--- DISCLAIMER

Ponscripter deliberately breaks compatibility with ONScripter.  For
example, it is sometimes able to read ONScripter saved games, but
ONScripter will almost never be able to read Ponscripter saved games.

If you use this program with games that were not designed for it, you
do so at your own risk.

Also, do NOT bother Ogapee with any bugs or problems you encounter.
This is a heavily modified fork.  I have fiddled around with the
source code to the extent that many critical parts have been changed
beyond all recognition.  It is unlikely that any bugs you find are
anything whatsoever to do with Ogapee.


--- COMPATIBILITY

Most of my testing is carried out on the following platforms:

* Ubuntu 8.10     x86_64 (primary development platform)
* Ubuntu 8.10     i386   (low-spec test platform)
* MacOS X 10.4    i386   (built as universal binary)

Note that I do not regularly build or test on any version of Microsoft
Windows.  The Win32 binaries I provide are cross-compiled on an Ubuntu
host.  However, this is for practical rather than religious reasons; I
do consider Windows to be a key target platform, and reports of
problems building or running Ponscripter on Windows will be treated as
seriously as any others.

I have tried to keep the code portable.  It has at various times
worked on Fedora, openSUSE, most BSDs, and Solaris 10.  However, these
platforms are not tested regularly.


=== OS X ISSUES

On OS X 10.4+, you will need to add a boolean key
CGDisableCoalescedUpdates (with value "Yes") to your bundle's
Info.plist in order for mouse clicks to cause a full page to display.
This workaround will hopefully only be temporary.


--- ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Ponscripter is built primarily on Ogapee's work, without which there
would be nothing here.

The version of ONScripter taken as a base also includes notable
contributions from Chendo (original English support) and insani
(further enhancements).  I have not attempted to quantify how much of
their work remains in this version; even if much of it has been
replaced, they still deserve recognition for bringing English support
to the NScripter world in the first place.

The following people (in alphabetical order) have contributed 
noteworthy patches and bug reports that have enhanced Ponscripter:

  Agilis
  Mion of Sonozaki Futago-tachi
  Roine Gustafsson
  Roto
  Starchanchan

Apologies to anyone I've missed -- please let me know so I can set the
record straight!


--- LICENSING

ONScripter is copyright © 2001-2007 Ogapee.  The Ponscripter fork is
copyright © 2006-2009 Haeleth.

Ponscripter is licensed under the GNU General Public License, version
2 or (at your option) any later version.  See COPYING for details.
